## R3Bin

_R3Bin_ is a _Smart Composting Ecosystem_ that leverages IoT technology to create an integrated collection and processing system that is convenient for Singaporeans to use.

## What it does & How it Works

R3Bin has 3 components: a Home Collection Bin, a Central Collection Bin, and a Mobile Application.

_1. Home Collection Bin_
Ambient sensors:
Air Quality, Temperature, Humidity, Moisture, Weight

Actuators:
Servo Motor, Red LED, Green LED, LCD Screen, RFID Card

Users select a category of food waste, Meat, Vegetables, or Carbohydrates by pressing the push buttons on the bin, before pouring their waste into the bin. After users press the enter button, the weights of each category and total weight will then be updated and displayed on the LCD screen.

If the air quality is bad, or temperature, humidity, or moisture in the home bin is too high, or the bin is at its maximum capacity, it is an indicator that the food should be cleared by the users and the red LED turns on. If the bin has no issues, the green LED turns on instead.

When users are ready to clear their home bins for donation to the central bin, they press the release button which updates the unique RFID card with the weight data and the servo motor lifts up, allowing users to remove the bin.

_2. Central Collection Bin_
Ambient sensors:
Air Quality, Temperature, Humidity, Moisture, RFID

Actuators:
Red LED, Green LED, Buzzer, Motor, OLED Display Screen

When users are ready to donate their food waste, they slide their home bin into the central collection bin which reads the unique RFID of the home bin and stores the weights into its own database before allocating and writing points to the user for donating. Upon completion of the process, the buzzer sounds and OLED screen will indicate the user can remove their personal bin from the machine.

Similar to the home bin, the ambient sensors will detect if the environment in the central bin is appropriate for the composting and breakdown of the food. The motor in the central bin will also agitate and stir the compost every time there is a donation in order to introduce oxygen to the mixture for a healthy compost.

_3. Mobile Application_
The mobile application allows users to track their donation history, bin health, and points. There is also a reward system on the app which allows users to exchange points for items such as vouchers and local produce.

## The Problems it Solves
# Food Waste in Singapore
Food waste accounted for 11% of the total waste generated in Singapore in 2023 which amounts to 755,000 tonnes. This is a significant environmental and economic issue due to the loss of resources used to create the food.

R3Bin encourages households, businesses, and schools to tackle this issue by adopting a circular framework - using the waste and putting it back into the system to create something new out of it, recycling it such that

# Composting Awareness & Convenience
Many composting systems are inconvenient for urban dwellers to keep up, and many do not have a use for the end product fertilizers. By creating a composting ecosystem like R3Bin, the process becomes user-friendly and educational.

# Urban Agriculture
The compost generated by the central bin can be used to support local agriculture in Singapore, creating a closed-loop system that benefits the urban community.

## How we built it

# Bins
Arduino IDE (C++), Arduino UNO

# Application
Figma, Flutter, Firebase

## Challenges we ran into

Integration of components, innovating and implementing a unique solution, sensor calibration, scalability

## Accomplishments that we're proud of

IoT integration, sustainability impact, community engagement, closed-loop solution

## Future Expansions for R3Bin

Data Analytics, ML/AI food waste recognition, educational campaigns
